---
date: "2019-09-30"
---
Was thinking about my cousins, and how I don't get to see them and their
kids as much as I'd like. And it got me thinking toward the trade-offs
we make in deciding between pursuing the raising of children vs the
raising of other pursuits in the world.

Thinking about the careful work of keeping a foot in both worlds --
being in touch with adults raising kids, in touch with the kids
themselves, and in touch with adults raising ideas. It got me thinking
that to be amongst adults raising ideas, these folks perhaps surround
themselves in the sorts of memes that can only nourish a small group of
people like them. Academics being the deepest example of this, toiling
away on perhaps important concepts that are utterly inaccessible to most
minds on earth. But at best, a people raising ideas figure out how to
help those ideas nourish other adults; how to feed them carefully into
the existing minds and cultures that are already living and breathing in
the world.

But that same creative space and process perhaps represents a milieu
that offers no nourishment to a child's mind. A kid won't care what
great meta concept or world-bending or society-improving thing their
parent is doing. If they experience that as a poverty of attention and
information that is accessible to them -- here and now in the mental
space in which they exist -- then that's a failure as a parent.  That
child might have a harder time growing into space of abundance that
allows them to appreciate what the parent is working on. Or they'll
arrive there with their own baggage and disadvantage.

Anyway, I suppose my realization is that raising kids is its own
informational niche; almost like an ecological niche. The mind of the
adult and mind of the child are not nourished on the same informational
diet. And it's a place of compromise.

Adults sometimes choose not to straddle the niche of raising children
and raising ideas, instead working only on ideas. But these adults
sacrifice an important negotiation and compromise that is perhaps part
of our deep history. And perhaps this negotiation is very intertwined
with what it is to be human. And I wonder if adults who neglect this
phase of development (child-rearing), might end up living down a strange
path of development, where their minds take a different form than our
ancient genes are equipped to successfully navigate.
