---
date: "2019-06-13"
---
Working in a high-churn culture like a civic hacknight, where 40% of
people might be new each week, there are some interesting opportunities
to work on non-exclusive and unloaded language for being critical of
dominant systems. Here are some turns of phrase I've discovered to be
useful:

- Instead of speaking against capitalism, speak of **capitalism's lack
  of curiosity** toward certain important things. I often say "I try to
  work on things that capitalism isn't curious about." People embedded
  in capitalist systems find it hard to be critical of it, likely
  because it's hard to imagine or hope  for anything else. But it's easy
  to agree that capitalism does not display an interest in certain
  things that humans are interested in. And a very human frame for that
  is _curiosity_. Being anti-capitalist is a heavy title to wear, but
  being skeptical of _incurious systems_ is easy. We can talk about it
  just as we might speak of skepticism toward intellectually or
  emotionally incurious people who don't ask questions of peers.
- Instead of speaking only about "diversity & inclusion", speak
  sometimes about **generosity of leadership**. I like to think of this
  as creating a positive pressure for leadership, so that it will flow
  outward. It doesn't prescribe where that leadership should flow, but
  if the general environment encourages thoughtfulness around
  representation, then the folks sharing leadership will inevitable end
  up on their own personal journey of who they should offer that
  leadership to. This allows the work to happen more in the headspace of
  the person doing the work.  They will have more ownership of the
  conclusions drawn.  Combined with short rotations of leadership,
  there's many surfaces and transition points to learn from. Community
  projects aren't companies -- you can only once appoint founders, so
  that decision bears great importance, but if the person stewarding an
  initiative changes often, then each change is an opportunity for each
  group to recalibrate on who that culture values seeing in a leadership
  position.
