---
date: "2019-10-01"
---
Was listening to a [wonderful Upstream podcast episode][upstream-lisi]
in which Lisi Krall was interviewed. She is just bursting with
provocative ideas on ecologies, language, entymology, and the emergence of
agriculture. But the ferocity on which she advocates for the importance
of the last one really struck me.

   [upstream-lisi]: https://soundcloud.com/upstreampodcast/lisi-krall

It inspired me to get into my usual _[complexity
science][complexity-note]_ way of thinking: What might this event
represent as a selected adaptation in the network at one level (human
society), and how might it be generalized to events that have happened
at other levels (biological)?

   [complexity-note]: #2019-05-17

Perhaps you have heard of mitochondria. If you remember from high
school, mitochondria are the "power plants of the cells". They produce
all the energy that runs the damn show. All complex multicellular
organisms have mitochondria. It's a way-old adaptation.

But there's a funny thing about how mitochondria came to be hanging out
in our cells, making us the energy we need as complex lifeforms. You
see, they have their own DNA, separate from ours. And the reason they
have that, is thought to be because they [used to be a separate
organism][mito-origin]. But somewhere along the line, way back when, a
mitochondria was enveloped by another, larger cell. And the mitochondria
was like "hey, I like these new digs", and the host cell either didn't
resist, or maybe it's little parasite allowed it to do more than it
could before, and fare better in the environment than non-parasitized
cells without mitochondria.

   [mito-origin]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mitochondrion#Origin_and_evolution

But anyhow, these two primitive creatures stumbled into destinies that
became intertwined. They learned to reproduce together, with the
mitochondria never leaving the host.

In some sense, the host cell simply adopted another organism, and
started nurturing it to produce energy for itself. Or maybe it was that
the parasite found a host that would protect it and allow it to
reproduce more than it ever could have on its own. Really both are true,
depending on your frame.

But anyhow, maybe you see where this is going. Perhaps agriculture is to
the human society's evolution, what mitochondria are to the evolution
from prokarytic to eukaryotic life. Each event was a symbiotic
envelopment of life-forms into the domain and jurisdiction of another.

Each allowed the host to re-organize information storage/exchange
systems it already had, and achieve new scales:

1. the mitochondrial revolution allowed cells, which already used DNA, to
   use that DNA in new ways; to begin driving processes that were
   previously energetically infeasible.

2. the agricultural revolution allowed humans, which already used
   language, to use that language in new ways; to begin driving
   processes that were previously energetically infeasible.

But this begs the question: Is the new order brought on by the
revolution itself, or does that simply unlock latent capacity in the
information system that was already there?
